# 4/9/2025 - Literature research for non-grey atmosphere model

9:36am

Looking for papers on 2/9, I found one that is well cited and discusses a derivation for a non-grey model for an irradiated atmosphere of an exoplanet. This session I will aim to read through as much of the paper as I can before the scheduled meeting with the group at 2pm

Paper read:

This will be added to the group Zotero so we can keep track of all the papers read

## Premise of paper (Abstract and 1)

Pseudo-grey models, like the one we have used for the initial model, are useful for approximating irradiated atmospheres of stars like brown dwarfs, but overestimate temperatures at low optical depths for exoplanets.

The paper will discuss the limiting factors of the pseudo-grey model and adjust the model for a more accurate atmospheric structure with a focus on correcting opacity in the infrared.

In the plot below, the paper compares a non-grey numerical model to pseudo grey models. The pseudo grey model for optical depths above order unity align with the non-grey model quite well, with isochrones matching the shape of the numerical model. Below the order unity the pseudo-grey models fail and models that fit well in the high optical depth deviate substantially in the low optical depth.

The paper aims to add non-grey cooling effects within the upper atmosphere to the 


## Definitions (2.1)

### Radiative transfer equation (2.1.1)

For the paper, they consider a plane-parallel atmosphere in LTE that recieves both an external thermal flux $\sigma_KT^{4}_{irr}$ at an angle of $\mu$ and an internal isotropic flux from below the atmosphere $\sigma_K T^{4}_{int}$.

The paper decribes effective temperature $T_{eff}$ as the sum of the external and internal temperature:

$$ T_{eff}^4 = T_{int}^4 + \mu T_{irr}^4$$

The radiative transfer equation for the problem:

$$-\mu\frac{dI_{\mu\nu}}{dm} = \kappa_\nu I_{\nu\mu} - \kappa_\nu B_\nu(T)$$

This has to be solved for all frequencies and angles, with $dm = \rho dz$. This equation has triple depencencies of $\mu$, $\nu$ and $T$ which is too complex. 


# 10/9/2025 - Continuation of reading

# 2 - Models for comparison to the non-grey model

### Optical Depths and Opacities (2.1.2)

They need to simplify the model, the first choice is the opacities. A simplified model would find themselves using the Rosseland mean opacity $\kappa_R$ which they define as:

$$\frac{1}{\kappa_R} = \int_0^\infty \frac{1}{\kappa_\nu} \frac{\delta B_\nu(T)}{\delta T} d\nu$$

This opacity is used when at all wavelengths the mean free path of photons is small compared to the scale height of the atmosphere. Using the mean opacity, the definition of optical depth becomes:

$$d\tau= \kappa_R dm$$

This is solved assuming hydrostatic equilibrium, so $dm = \frac{dP}{g}$

The other opacity they use is the planck mean opacity $\kappa_P$ which is defined as:

$$\kappa_P = \int_0^\infty \kappa_\nu B_\nu(T)d\nu$$

They then define $\gamma_P$ as the ratio of the two opacities which was seen in the pseudo-grey model:

$$\gamma_P = \frac{\kappa_P}{\kappa_R}$$

For a grey atmosphere, $\gamma_P = 1$, but for a non-grey atmosphere, $\gamma_P > 1$. This is due to the Rossland opacity being weighted towards low opacity regions, while the Planck mean is weighted towards high opacity regions by the $\kappa_\nu$ term in each definition.

They also define the opacity for stellar flux as $\kappa_v$ as the collimated flux from the star is absorbed at different atmospheric layers. They also link this opacity to the Rosseland mean opacity with a ratio $\gamma_v$:

$$\gamma_v = \frac{\kappa_v}{\kappa_R}$$


### Picket Fence model (2.1.3)

#### From Textbook (17.6 - Line blanketing and picket fence model)
This is discussed within the textbook at chapter 17.6 about line blanketing. The main three needed parameters for the line spctrum of a stellar atmosphere are the temperature, surface gravity and chemical composition/metalicity. Early models were innadiquate as the opacity of materials had large variation at photoionisation edges and spectral lines. Additionally, there is the inward increase in temperature that causes a steeper temperature gradient than a grey atmosphere would predict due to the backwarming effect. These effects coupled with the complexity of chemical composition of stars on spectral lines in a stars opacity is referred to as line blanketing.

An statistical approach to the line blanketing problem is the picket fence model derived by Chandrasekhar. The model assumes that the continuum is in LTE and it's opacity is constant/independent over frequency. The other assumption is that the lines do not overlap and have square profiles, and the final assumption is that the lines are uniformly distributed over frequency.

This leads to the picket fence shaped plot of opacity over frequency

#### From Paper

The paper uses the picket fence model as two different sets of opacities with different wavelength dependencies may have the same Rosseland mean opacity and Planck mean opacity. The picket fence model is to constrain the model further by defining two new opacities that thermal opacities can take $\kappa_1$ and $\kappa_2$:

$$\kappa_\nu = \kappa_1 \; for \; \nu \in [n\Delta \nu, \; n\Delta \nu + \delta \nu]$$

$$\kappa_\nu = \kappa_2 \; for \; \nu \in [n\Delta \nu + \delta\nu, (n+1)\Delta\nu]$$

$$n \in [1,N]$$


$\beta$ is defined as the bandwidth:

$$\beta = \frac{1}{\int_0^\infty B_\nu d\nu}\sum_{n=1}^N \int_{n\Delta \nu}^{n\Delta \nu + \delta \nu} B_\nu d\nu$$

In the paper they choose the planck function as constant over the distance between two lines $\Delta \nu$, so $\beta$ becomes:

$$\beta \equiv \frac{\delta \nu}{\Delta \nu}$$

The Rosseland mean opacity becomes:

$$\kappa_R = \frac{\kappa_1\kappa_2}{\beta\kappa_2 + (1-\beta)\kappa_1}$$

The Planck mean opacity becomes:
$$\kappa_P = \beta \kappa_1 + (1-\beta)\kappa_2$$

And similar to before, the paper defines more ratios of opacities:

$$\gamma_1 \equiv \frac{\kappa_1}{\kappa_R}$$

$$\gamma_2 \equiv \frac{\kappa_2}{\kappa_R}$$

$$R \equiv \frac{\kappa_1}{\kappa_2} = \frac{\gamma_1}{\gamma_2}$$

They set a limit on the optical depth following the Chandrasekhar picket fence model:

$$\tau_{lim} \equiv \frac{1}{\gamma_1\gamma_2} \sqrt{\frac{\gamma_P}{3}}$$

#### My understanding of the picket fence model

Looking at both the textbook and the paper, I think I understand the picket fence model. It is a way to simplify complex line opacities if the goal isn't to model the exact spectrum but instead simulate the effects of line blanketing on atmopheric structure as a whole such as the temperature profile.

# 11/9/2025 - Continuation of reading

## Discrete Ordinate Methods (2.2)

The paper goes on to discuss the different discrete ordinate methods to approximate the integrals for the radiative transfer equation. They use it for the different approiximaate models for atmospheric structure and why they don't work for the externally irradiated atmosphere.

### Grey Atmosphere (2.2.1)

They do a Gaussian sum over the angles $\mu$ and sum up to 4 terms. Precision can be increased by adding more terms. They set the boundary condition as simply that the specific intensity of rays leaving the atmosphere at $\tau = 0$ is zero, that is $I_{\mu<0}(\tau=0) = 0$. The 4th order solution is:

$$T(\tau)^4 = \frac{3}{4}T_{int}^4(\tau + Q + L_1e^{k_1\tau} + L_2e^{k_2\tau} + L_3e^{k_3\tau})$$

Where $[Q,k_1,k_2,k_3]$ are constants. This leads to the definition of skin temperature as the temperature at $\tau = 0$:

$$T_{skin}^4 = (\frac{\sqrt{3}}{4})T_{int}^4$$

This model only works for atmospheres with no external irradiation.

### Non-grey case (2.2.2)

Developed by Chandrasekhar (1960) that takes the grey atmosphere model and adds a perturebation to include non-grey thermal effects. The model is limited to only small deviations from the grey case and required high precision numerical methods to solve or very large deviations that can be solved analytically. The paper employs the picket fence model in conjunction with the second order approximation for the angular dependency that gives the following solution:

$$T(\tau)^4 = \frac{3}{4}T_{int}^4 \left[\frac{1}{\sqrt{3\gamma_P}} + \tau + \frac{(\sqrt{\gamma_P} - \gamma_1)(\sqrt{\gamma_P} - \gamma_2)}{\gamma_1\gamma_2\sqrt{\gamma_P}}(e^{-\tau/\tau_{lim} - 1})\right]$$

Similar to the grey case, the skin temperature is defined as:

$$T_{skin}^4 = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{4\sqrt{\gamma_P}}T_{int}^4$$

The grey case occurs when $\gamma_P = 1$ where the two skin temperatures are equal.

## Moment Equations Method (2.3)

This is the method we have used for the pseudo-grey model that Vernica and Griff are coding up while I plan for the non-grey model. I will read through this section to see if there is any major departure from what we have done. 

### 2.3.1 Equations for the momentum of radiation intensity

The paper derives the moment equations from the radiative transfer equation as was done by Eddington (1916). This gives the following:

$$\frac{dH_\nu}{d\tau_\nu} = J_\nu - B_\nu(T)$$

$$\frac{dK_\nu}{d\tau_\nu} = H_\nu $$

This is the same as what the textbook has in chapter 17.7 (see notes from 2/9/2025) but instead of writing the moment equations in terms of $z$ they use optical depth $\tau_\nu$. This just eliminates the opacities and extinction terms from the equations by grouping them into the optical depth term.

Assuming radiative equilibrium, the first DE becomes:

$$\int_0^\infty \kappa_\nu (J_\nu - B_\nu) d\nu = 0$$

For the grey model, the frequency depenency of the opacity is removed and $\kappa_\nu$ becomes $\kappa_R$ and can be taken out of the integral. This leads to the same conclusion as before that $J = B$.

For a frequency dependent opacity, the solutions for the DE's have four unknowns and not closed. A closure relation is needed to relate the moments to each other, a common one is the Eddington approximation $J_\nu = 3K_\nu$. The approximation is usable for two cases: an isotropic radiation field and in the two stream approximation.

### 2.3.2 Boundary conditions



## 3 - Analytic irradiated non-grey picket fence model

### 3.1 Equations

Using the opacities defined in chapter 2.1.2 of the paper where the thermal opacities were defined as dependent on $\kappa_\nu$, coupling with a picket fence model means that there are three opacties that the model will depend on $\kappa_1$, $\kappa_2$ and $\kappa_v$. Additionally, the difference between thermal and visible channels depends on the angular dependency, not the frequency. Integrating the moment equations gives:

$$\frac{dH_{(1,2)}}{d\tau} = \gamma_{(1,2)}J_{(1,2)} - \gamma_{(1,2)}(\beta, 1-\beta)B(T)$$

$$\frac{dK_{(1,2)}}{d\tau} = \gamma_{(1,2)}H_{(1,2)}$$


The planck function is constant over each bin, that is $B_1 = \beta B(T)$ and $B_2 = (1-\beta)B(T)$. The paper assumes the Eddington approximation is valid in the to bands, that is $J_{(1,2)}=3K_{(1,2)}$. This leads to the following second order DE's by combining the two moment equations:

$$\frac{d^2J_1}{d\tau^2} = 3\gamma_1(J_1 - \beta B) \;\;\;\;\; (1)$$
$$\frac{d^2J_2}{d\tau^2} = 3\gamma_2(J_2 - (1-\beta) B) \;\;\;\;\; (2)$$

The radiative equilibrium equation:

$$\gamma_1 J_1 + \gamma_2 J_2 + \gamma_v J_v = \gamma_P B \;\;\;\;\;\;(3)$$

The paper denotes quantities with v as the momentum of the incident stellar radiation. Assuming the radaiation is collimated and arrives at an angle $\mu_* = \cos\theta_*$, the moment equations for the visible radiation are:

$$(J_\nu, H_\nu, K_\nu) = (1, \mu_*, \mu_*^2)I_*$$

where $I_*$ is the total incident intensity:

$$I_* = \int_0^\infty I_{*\nu} d\nu$$

Absorption of stellar radiation is given by the following:

$$J_v(\tau) = -\frac{H_v(0)}{\mu_*}e^{-\gamma_v^*\tau} \; \; where \; \gamma_v^*\equiv \gamma_v/\mu_*$$

Equation 1 - 3 are coupled equations, the following two variables are defined to decouple them:

$$J_\gamma \equiv \frac{J_1}{\gamma_1} + \frac{J_2}{\gamma_2}$$

$$J_{\gamma^3} \equiv \frac{J_1}{\gamma_1^3} + \frac{J_2}{\gamma_2^3}$$

Combining this with equation (1), (2) and (3) gives the following:

$$ \frac{d^2J_\gamma}{d\tau^2} = -3\gamma_vJ_v \;\;\;\; (4)$$

$$\frac{d^2J_{\gamma^3}}{d\tau^2} = 3(J_\gamma - B) \;\;\;\; (5)$$

Equation (3) becomes a linear equation:

$$ B = \frac{\gamma_1^2 + \gamma_2^2}{\gamma_P}J_\gamma - \frac{(\gamma_1\gamma_2)^2}{\gamma_P}J_{\gamma^3} + \frac{\gamma_v}{\gamma_P}J_v \;\;\;\; (6)$$

(4), (5) and (6) are now two decoupled equations and a linear equation. Defining boundary conditions allows for the solution of the system.



# 13/9/2025 - Continuation of reading

### 3.2 Boundary conditions

To solve the system of equations, boundary conditions are needed. First the high optical depth BC, i.e. $\tau \rightarrow \infty$. When $\tau$ approaches infinity, the system should approach the diffusion approximation $J_\nu = B_\nu$.


















